# State of Disunity July 8th 2019

This is the first in a series reporting on the current development of
Disunity.

It has been a few months since anyone has heard anything about Disunity and we
wanted to write up this report to share what we've been up to. If you haven't
heard of Disunity yet, there is a write-up on the wiki describing the project:

https://github.com/disunity-hq/wiki/wiki/WhyDisunity

In short, Disunity is a full-stack modding toolchain for Unity games and
applications. Each of the components within the Disunity stack were designed
together and for each other. In this way, we aim to create a complete and
quality Unity modding experience for developers and users alike.

## Background

One of the largely unsolved technical hurdles with Unity modding has to do with
loading custom mod assets. More specifically, prefabs that have scripts
attached, where the implementation classes of those scripts live within a mod
assembly. Traditionally, mod authors would need to load their prefabs, and
attach any scripts needed by those prefabs at runtime. This is workable, but
doesn't scale well. It's much more conveinent to naturally attach scripts to
prefabs within the Unity Editor before assetbundle export.

While looking into overcoming this issue for their own mods, ldlework
discovered an open source project ModTool which claimed to solve this
issue. ModTool however was created for Unity application authors to integrate
first-class support for modding into their own games. ModTool actually appears
to be the source-precursor to the paid Unity asset uMod which serves the same
purpose. Anyway, around here, we're in the business of forcing our mods onto
whatever Unity game we'd like. By studying the ModTool source and slowly
working to fork it into a state usable for injected mods, MultiMod was created.

MultiMod was a plugin for Bepin that could load "asset-mods" which were a
format specific to MultiMod. But the value add was that it contained the
ability to support prefabs where script implementations resided in the mod
assembly. This is very useful for mods incorporating highly-complex prefabs
like those that introduce custom characters to a game.

At some point, inspired by the nice tooling created within the Risk of Rain 2
modding community, ldlework spoke with a number of other mod developers about
the creation of a Unity-generic toolchain which would stand on the value-add of
the MultiMod technology. A toolchain that we ourselves would like to use.

## The Stack

The Disunity "stack" is toolchain composed of a number of components:

- **A format**: A standard mod-archive format. This includes manifest schema,
  artifact locations within the archive, and the feature semantics the format
  represents.
- **An exporter**: A Unity Editor GUI which lets you configure and export
  your mod into a standard Disunity archive.
- **A loader**: Loads mods into a game, implementing all features of the
  standard format.
- **A manager**: A desktop application for managing your locally installed
  Unity games and their mods.
- **A store**: A site for browsing mods and utilizing community features from
  your browser.
- **An API**: A web service for interacting with the store programmatically.


Currently the github repos are organized as such:

- **disunity-hq/store** All of the web components including the site and API.
- **disunity-hq/mod-manager** The desktop application
- **disunity-hq/core** Contains the actual core, the exporter, and the loader

## Who's involved?

Mythic has been the primary creative behind the design of the store as his Risk
of Rain 2 specific store Thunderstore is the primary inspiration. He has
contributed hours and hours to design conversations on both the store and also
the format standard.

ldlework did the original MultiMod work, established the current core, exporter
and layout implementations, built much of the current store implementation.

Spacehamster was crucial in much of the initial theory-crafting and practical
experimentation with reverse engineering the original ModTool and solving the
prefab-script problem.

ghorsington has contributed directly to both MultiMod and the Disunity core and
has been a substantial collaborator on core design and low-level technical
mysteries.

UltraWelfare established the foundations for the manager that we have
today.

Raegeous has contributed to both the manager and to a significant upgrade
effort to the store. He's also regularly contributing to help solve other
technical mysteries of his co-collaborators which has been great.

Scottbot95 has done a significant amount of the work that's brought the manager
to the state that it is today. He's contributed even more to the store where
he's been active in both the design and implementation. In general, Scottbot95
is really killin it. ^_^

## What's up with the Format Standard?

Disunity has a number of requirements for the format standard in order to
implement a number of existing features, including mod prefabs and scenes. When
the initial work on the core components was started, a format was established
to support all those features. These format features mostly came from the
original MultiMod format. So currently there is an implemented format
standard. It just doesn't have all the features we're going to need.

You may have seen some of the existing manifest standardization work that's
been taking place for Mythic's Risk of Rain 2's store, Thunderstore:

https://github.com/risk-of-thunder/Thunderstore/issues/93

A lot of good thinking has been done there. We intend to essentially merge
everything from the two to form a manifest that covers all of the concerns
involved. So far, we have been doing a lot of other work to get the foundations
established for all of the component projects and so the manifest hasn't been
*completely* finalized -- however it is the #1 priority as of this report.

## What's up with the Exporter?

The exporter is in great shape. A lot of work was done a number of months ago
to transform the old MultiMod exporter into one suitable for the Disunity
feature-set. There is a nice extensible foundation there now.

Since that work has been done, some new ideas regarding the format standard and
the API's data-model have surfaced. We'll need to go back once those things
stabalize to create or polish off whatever interfaces don't match those
eventually finalized standards.

## What's up with the Loader?

The story for the loader is much like that of the exporter. A great deal of
work was done at the outset to create a nice extensible foundation. Since then
some of our ideas for how the format standard will work have changed, and so
some of the related features will need to refactored or polished to align with
those new ideas.

One major feature that was implement since MultiMod is that Disunity now
supports first-class "preload assemblies". These assemblies are loaded before
the target app or game and can do all sorts of shenannigans you can't do at
runtime (think Monomod prepatchers).

The majority of work that currently needs doing in the loader are features
revolving around dependency resolution and versioning support.

## What's up with the Manager?

There is currently a respectable Electron/TypeScript/React/Redux/Antd
foundation making up the manager. Some UI design experimentation has been done
by those who have contributed but a lot of work is still needed to bring the
manager to a usable state.

The Manager needs to keep track of multiple games and interact with the store
via the API. The support for multiple games also complicates the UI
design.

However there are no legitimately hard technical problems here. Currently
development on the manager has waned primarily to focus on building out the
store. We're currently looking for anyone who knows the related stack who can
contribute to either the frontend UI, or the pure TypeScript book-keeping of
games/mods and API interactions.

## What's up with the Store?

Quite a lot actually.

First, a domain has been purchased. Nothing's there yet, but the store will
eventually be available at disunity.io

Initial work on the store started off as a fork of Mythic's Risk of Rain 2
store, Thunderstore. This was going pretty well as Thunderstore already has
much of what a mod store needs.

Thunderstore is implemented in Python using Django. Django is probably the
nicest and most feature-complete web-framework for any language. That said
Python isn't the greatest language to work with when the rest of your stack is
C# and TypeScript which benefit from probably the best editor support there is
for any language.

It was decided to instead implement the Disunity store in C# on ASP.NET
Core. There are a number of reasons for this, and some definite trade-offs. The
primary reason for the switch is that Disunity is fundamentally a stack focused
on Unity mod development. As such, the ecosystems we're closest to are those
inhabited by Unity and C# developers. It's true, the manager is TypeScript but
discussion bore out other considerations which outweighted this one, in that
case.

Other reasons for the switch to C# and ASP.NET Core include the desire to work
in a type-safe language with good editor support. To be able to share code with
the core. To be able to use a natively asynchronous runtime. To use a runtime
that usefully supports dependency injection. We've probably forgotton others.

One of the deeply-cutting trade-offs with ASP.NET Core, while a modern
featureful web-framework, it does not have every battery included that Django
does (which is seemingly ever battery). That sucks. However it does have many
batteries. Further, development within ASP.NET Core is particularly interesting
right now as 3.0 is in preview and brings a number of fascinating features,
including Blazor which allows us to write our front-end code in C# which gets
compiled to web-assembly. We're quite attracted by this as it will allow our
frontend code to seemlessly integrate with our backend logic with IDE support
to boot.

Much of the recent Disunity activity has been on this ASP.NET Core
rewrite. Including a recent attempt to upgrade the site from ASP.NET Core 2.2
to 3.0 with those Blazor features. Unfortunately, this stuff is all still in
preview and not all of our dependencies support being used just yet. So while
we've spent a good amount of time exploring this upgrade and learning about how
we will eventually tackle it, we've since walked back to our 2.2
implementation.

### What about actual store features?

With regards to actually getting back to a place of similar functionality to
Thunderstore, we have made some progress.

- A mod uploading interface is working
- JSONSchema validation for the manifest is working
- Other archive validation is working
- Social authentication is working
- The core Disunity web-design is in place

We do have some work to do however. Even though we've created initial
models/tables for the database, including multi-user organization support,
we've realized that our quick sketches don't exactly align with our vision for
the underlying archive format standard. So that's why we've established a new
roadmap to iron out the order of operations so to speak going forward.

## Summary

- We've got the technology for asset-mods in the bag.
- We've got an extensible Unity Editor UI extension for exporting mod archives.
- We've got a capable loader which supports preload and runtime assemblies and
a number of asset features.
- We have a strong foundation of a mod manager built with
Electron/Typescript/React/Redux/Antd.
- We have a well-factored store codebase built ontop of ASP.NET Core.

However:

- We have some final kinks to work out in our format standard.
- We have to update the store data-model to reflect the final format standard.
- We have to flesh out the API based on the final data-model.
- We have to finish the rest of the store views, etc
- We have to implement backblaze store, and store deployment automation
- We have to get the manager talking to that API, and doing all the other stuff
the manager needs to do regarding the actualy underlying mod management, plus
the corresponding UI work.
- We have to go back and tweak the exporter and loaders to talk the final
format standard and implement any missing features such as dependency
resolution and versioning logic.

And of course we'll need to document everything.

## Can I Help?

Please do! If you know the Untiy API, React/Redux, or ASP.NET Core you can
probably make a huge difference! If you just know C# or TypeScript, there is
little doubt we can't help you get started on something which will still make a
huge difference! Even helping us document the various components as we reach
0.1 will make a huge difference.

Seriously though, if you have even small desire to help get Disunity released
we could use your help and will help you along the way too.

We've made our central project board available for everyone to view. This is
probably the easiest way to track what's being worked on:

https://github.com/orgs/disunity-hq/projects/1

If you'd like to get involved please contact Scottbot95.
